README.md, before:

# Audio-to-Midi

Audio-to-Midi is a model for converting pure piano music into midi events.
It is a Transformer based model working on raw audio samples, which is processed by a CNN before reaching the Transformer stack.
The model is written in Jax, and uses a bit of rust code to achieve efficient dataset loading.

This model powers the [Piano Transcriber iOS app](https://github.com/kasper0406/PianoTranscriberApp), and is trained on data generated by [SwiftMidiBouncer](https://github.com/kasper0406/SwiftMidiBouncer).

Notice that the model is trained only on Piano samples, and therefore I do not expect it to work very well for other instruments.

## Setup

1. Make a new Python environment, and install necessary packages. I do not have a full list currently. The main ones are jax and equinox.

2. The data-loading requires the rust plugin from the `rust-plugins` directory to be installed. To do this:
  - Install Rust (https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)
  - `pip install maturin`
  - Run `maturin develop -r` in the `rust-plugins` directory

3. The data loading uses FFmpeg to read audio files and convert them to downsampled raw audio. You need `ffmpeg` to be available. Note that I've seen quite big performance gains, by manually [compiling my own version of FFmpeg](https://trac.ffmpeg.org/wiki/CompilationGuide/Ubuntu).

## Inferring
This repository provides the `audio_to_midi.py` CLI to interact with the model. It supports the following operations:

### Inferring Midi events from an audio file
To generate midi events from an audio file, run the following command:
```bash
python audio_to_midi.py <input_audio_file> [<output_midi_file.mid>]
```
In addition to output the midi file, the raw probability distributions outputted by the model is plotted as well using matplotlib:
![Audio-to-Midi output distribution example](screenshots/output_distribution.png)

### Computing the validation loss
For a dataset directory containing audio samples along with csv files annotated with Midi events, different loss metrics can be calculated. Fx:
```
⇒  python audio_to_midi.py --validation /Volumes/git/ml/datasets/midi-to-sound/validation_set_only_yamaha
Restoring saved model at step 359000
Loaded test set
Finished evaluating test loss
Validation loss: 74.94306182861328
Hit rate: 0.7999402284622192
Eventized diff: 66.33872985839844
```

## Training
1. Setup the dataset, which can be done by generating a new one using [SwiftMidiBouncer](https://github.com/kasper0406/SwiftMidiBouncer)
2. Adjust the parameters in the `model.py` file, and in `train.py` to point it to the desired dataset, as well as adjusting the batch size and learning rate.
4. Run `python train.py` to start the training

The training has been tested on a TPU, where data sharding has been used, to parallelize training across all available devices.

## Exporting

Audio-to-Midi is written in Jax, which by itself, is not very useful, if you want to run inferrence in non-Python environments, such as Phones or web-apps.

The `export.py` file supports the following conversions:
1. The Audio-to-Midi Jax model to Tensorflow
2. Tensorflow to TFLite
3. Tensorflow to CoreML using [coremltools](https://github.com/apple/coremltools).

XLA is note really fully supported by TFLite and coremltools, so unfortunately, we use the older way to export form Jax to Tensorflow.
The exporting code is quite fragile, and requires a bunch of tuning to actually work. See the `export.py` file for all details.

Commit message:

Fix TF inference and add a section about pre-trained models to README

README.md, after:

# Audio-to-Midi

Audio-to-Midi is a model for converting pure piano music into midi events.
It is a Transformer based model working on raw audio samples, which is processed by a CNN before reaching the Transformer stack.
The model is written in Jax, and uses a bit of rust code to achieve efficient dataset loading.

This model powers the [Piano Transcriber iOS app](https://github.com/kasper0406/PianoTranscriberApp), and is trained on data generated by [SwiftMidiBouncer](https://github.com/kasper0406/SwiftMidiBouncer).

Notice that the model is trained only on Piano samples, and therefore I do not expect it to work very well for other instruments.

## Setup

1. Make a new Python environment, and install necessary packages. I do not have a full list currently. The main ones are jax and equinox.

2. The data-loading requires the rust plugin from the `rust-plugins` directory to be installed. To do this:
  - Install Rust (https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)
  - `pip install maturin`
  - Run `maturin develop -r` in the `rust-plugins` directory

3. The data loading uses FFmpeg to read audio files and convert them to downsampled raw audio. You need `ffmpeg` to be available. Note that I've seen quite big performance gains, by manually [compiling my own version of FFmpeg](https://trac.ffmpeg.org/wiki/CompilationGuide/Ubuntu).

## Inferring
This repository provides the `audio_to_midi.py` CLI to interact with the model. It supports the following operations:

### Inferring Midi events from an audio file
To generate midi events from an audio file, run the following command:
```bash
python audio_to_midi.py <input_audio_file> [<output_midi_file.mid>]
```
In addition to output the midi file, the raw probability distributions outputted by the model is plotted as well using matplotlib:
![Audio-to-Midi output distribution example](screenshots/output_distribution.png)

### Computing the validation loss
For a dataset directory containing audio samples along with csv files annotated with Midi events, different loss metrics can be calculated. Fx:
```
⇒  python audio_to_midi.py --validation /Volumes/git/ml/datasets/midi-to-sound/validation_set_only_yamaha
Restoring saved model at step 359000
Loaded test set
Finished evaluating test loss
Validation loss: 74.94306182861328
Hit rate: 0.7999402284622192
Eventized diff: 66.33872985839844
```

# Pre-trained model
A pre-trained model has been released in three formats:
* *Jax-checkpoints*: Unpack these in the directory of this repository, and run the inferrence CLI as per above.
* *CoreML*: This is a model used for iOS. The [ModelManager class in the Piano Transcriber app](https://github.com/kasper0406/PianoTranscriberApp/blob/main/PianoTranscriber/ModelManager.swift) has an example of how to use it.
* *Tensorflow*: This model can be run by using the `infer_tf.py` cli. Example:
  ```bash
  python infer_tf.py <audio file>
  ```

## Training
1. Setup the dataset, which can be done by generating a new one using [SwiftMidiBouncer](https://github.com/kasper0406/SwiftMidiBouncer)
2. Adjust the parameters in the `model.py` file, and in `train.py` to point it to the desired dataset, as well as adjusting the batch size and learning rate.
4. Run `python train.py` to start the training

The training has been tested on a TPU, where data sharding has been used, to parallelize training across all available devices.

## Exporting

Audio-to-Midi is written in Jax, which by itself, is not very useful, if you want to run inferrence in non-Python environments, such as Phones or web-apps.

The `export.py` file supports the following conversions:
1. The Audio-to-Midi Jax model to Tensorflow
2. Tensorflow to TFLite
3. Tensorflow to CoreML using [coremltools](https://github.com/apple/coremltools).

XLA is note really fully supported by TFLite and coremltools, so unfortunately, we use the older way to export form Jax to Tensorflow.
The exporting code is quite fragile, and requires a bunch of tuning to actually work. See the `export.py` file for all details.
